Few things in life are more painful
than the death of someone we love.
When my dad was diagnosed with Alzheimer’s,
I felt incredibly worried and anxious.
When he finally passed away,
I had spent so much time worrying about him
and thinking about him
that I felt a huge emptiness.
I didn’t really know what to do with myself.
Shiho, our daughter,
died from a sickness
when she was 16 years old.
She had a disability,
so she was always with us.
Losing someone who was always there,
you know, right here in front of you
—that loss can’t be expressed in words.
If you’ve experienced the loss
of someone you love,
is there anything
that can help ease the pain?
No two people experience
grief in the same way.
But there are some practical suggestions
that may help you.
These are frequently cited
by grief counselors as being effective.
Number one:
Accept support from your friends and family.
I found it difficult
to accept help from others
because I felt like what I was going through
was so difficult that I felt like
my friends wouldn’t understand.
But when I reached out to my friends,
they could do some of the things
that I maybe had enjoyed with my dad.
And so it gave me the confidence
that I wasn’t going to be alone
—that I had friends
that could fill that hole for me.
Our friends sent us upbuilding messages
and lots of flowers,
enough to fill up this room.
Friends are a big help.
They truly were there for us.
Number two:
Take care of your health.
Maintain a balanced diet,
stay physically active,
drink plenty of water,
and try to get enough sleep.
This is especially important
when you are grieving,
because grief can be exhausting.
I found that if I
didn’t get good enough sleep,
it made things a lot harder.
I try to avoid being on my phone
too much before bed,
and I try and do things that relax me.
Number three:
Be balanced.
Many find it helpful to alternate
periods of grieving
with breaks in their routine.
You might consider spending time
with new friends,
learning new skills,
or just enjoying some time off.
While at home, I was a bit down
and maybe a little pessimistic.
But when I stepped outside,
I noticed how nice
the breeze was and I felt so much better.
Taking moments to relax works.
Number four: Help others.
Many find it helpful
to use some of their time
to help others,
including friends and relatives
who are also grieving
the loss of your loved one.
Acts 20:35, where it says
“there is more happiness
in giving than there is
in receiving,” really helped me.
So I tried every day,
even if it was reaching out
on the phone,
to do something for someone else.
And I found that really helped
with not just making me happy
but it helped control my anxiety too.
Number five:
Remember your loved one.
Many find it comforting to do things
that help keep alive the memory
of the person they’ve lost.
We sometimes talk about her,
saying, “Shiho used to laugh if we said this”
or “Do you remember she liked this?”,
and remembering those moments
warms our hearts.
None of these things can
completely erase the pain of grief,
but they may provide you
with at least a measure of relief.
The advice offered in this video
is in perfect harmony
with principles found in the Bible.
Many who have lost someone
they love have found
that turning to the Bible gives them
peace of mind and comfort.
For more information
on how the Bible can help
you cope with the pain of grief,
please visit our website, jw.org.